# The Gnomy Framework
By Rickard V. Hultgren: Cultivating Emotional & Strategic Clarity

**Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)**\
This work, \"The Gnomy Framework version 1.1: Cultivating Emotional &
Strategic Clarity,\" by Rickard V. Hultgren, is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. To view a copy
of this license, visit <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/>.\

The Gnomy Framework is a structured yet flexible tool designed to
enhance emotional self-leadership, coaching, reflection, and narrative
transformation. It's particularly powerful when navigating complexity,
change, or interpersonal dynamics. Here's a clear breakdown of its
purpose and applications, categorized by intent and user contexts.


## Core Purpose of the Gnomy Framework

The Gnomy Framework provides a structured journey for individuals and
groups to:

-   **Anchor** themselves before reacting or making decisions.

-   **Unravel** internal narratives and external influences.

-   **Envision** future possibilities with emotional intelligence.

-   **Strategize** risks, motivations, and responsibilities.

-   **Iterate** and evolve.

It supports a holistic process of emotional insight, cognitive clarity,
and personal strategy-making. It's an ideal tool for coaching, personal
growth, mental health support, group reflection, and leadership
training.


## Summary of Gnomy Component Roles

::: tabular
\|p0.2\|p0.35\|p0.35\| **Stage** & **Purpose** & **Function**\
**G -- Grounding** & Establish presence and perspective. & Breath,
pause, curiosity, perspective framing using **FIND the LENS**.\
**N -- Narrative** & Understand internal drives and tensions. & Identify
pain points and feelings towards the challenge using the **LUX Lantern
model**.\
**O -- Others** & Map relational influences and shared identity. &
Understand self and others across time using **CROWS**.\
**M -- More** & Identify inner and outer resources. & Leverage
strengths, relationships, knowledge using **SPARK**.\
**Y -- Yikes!** & Strategize through risks and change. & Assess risk
spectrum, derive action, prioritize, evolve using **SAGE**.\
:::

## The Gnomish Journey: A Metaphorical Compass

![image](GNOMY.png){width="\\linewidth"}

Imagine this: A Gnomish Journey of Pond-Bound Reflection. A small gnome
stands on a delicate, hybrid plant -- perhaps a blend of strawberry and
water lily -- nestled within a tranquil pond. This pond embodies a
specific context, while the individual plant represents a distinct
situation. Plants in this pond are interconnected by slender tendrils.
This metaphor serves as a cognitive anchor, associating specific actions
or mental states with distinct metaphorical elements, thereby becoming a
quick mental shortcut for recalling and applying the framework's
principles, especially during moments of stress or complexity.

## Key Metaphorical Elements: {#key-metaphorical-elements .unnumbered}

-   **FIND the LENS:** The Gnome wears glasses. The right lens helps see
    the *antagonist* in the situation (who this is about), while the
    left lens helps see the *causing force* (deuteragonist or
    antagonist). These glasses represent gaining perspective and
    discerning different appraisals.

-   **LUX Lantern model:** In their left hand, the gnome holds a lantern
    of current feeling. From bottles in their belt, filled with
    luminescent powder of different colours, the gnome pours some powder
    into the lantern, and it begins to glow. This symbolizes
    illuminating your inner narrative and emotional landscape.

-   **CROWS:** On the right shoulder, a black crow perches confidently,
    ready to fly to other gnomes with messages. This embodies
    understanding how others shape your story and considering external
    perspectives.

-   **SPARK:** Above the left hand, the glowing spark is floating in the
    air, manipulated by the gnome's twisting hand, creating a gentle
    wind that gathers dried leaves from the gnome's leaf-heap. This
    symbolizes uncovering resources and possibilities, using them to
    navigate.

-   **SAGE:** In their right hand, the gnome holds a single sage leaf,
    dry and bitter on the tongue. It's a reminder: wisdom isn't always
    sweet. It comes with limits, trade-offs, and hard-earned truths.
    This represents facing risks and choosing wisely.

And so, this gnome walks -- leaving footprints shaped by emotion,
relationship, strength, and restraint. Every step is a journey through
GNOMY: Grounding, Narrative, Others, More, and Yikes!


## The Gnomy Framework: Your Step-By-Step Guide

The Gnomy Framework is designed to be a practical tool. This section
provides detailed, actionable prompts for each step, transforming
theoretical concepts into tangible user experiences.

## Step 0: Grounding (FIND the LENS) --- Find Your Inner Position

**FIND the LENS** helps you regain perspective by pausing to explore
goals, emotions, and responsibility with intention. Before diving into
analysis or action, ground yourself in the present moment to regain
perspective. Grounding prepares your mind and body for reflective,
intentional thinking. Use the **FIND** sequence to anchor yourself and
then apply the **LENS** to discern different appraisals.


-   **F -- Feel your breath/urge**: Embodied grounding. Helps interrupt
    reactivity and build emotional awareness before analysis.

    -   *Now feel your urge---and others' urges.*

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Appraisal dimension: Goal Relevance**

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:**

        -   "What urge is arising in me right now? What is the physical
            sensation associated with it?"

        -   "What is the emotional signal behind it? (e.g., anger, fear,
            sadness, excitement)"

        -   "What urge might be arising in the other people involved?
            How might their physical or emotional state be similar or
            different from mine?"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Insight:** Emotions signal that a **goal
        or value is at stake**---yours or someone else's. Tune into that
        signal. This aligns with DBT's emphasis on emotional awareness
        [@linehan1993cognitive].

-   **I -- Introduce pause**: Goal-mapping and perspective expansion.
    Surfaces implicit motivations and helps distinguish between
    short-term urges and deeper goals.

    -   *Silently say: "It's just in my mind." This reminds you that
        goals live inside individual minds.*

    -   *Now ask: "What else can I find?"*

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Appraisal dimensions: Goal Congruence &
        Hidden Goals**

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:**

        -   "What other goals (both explicit and implicit) are connected
            to the topic for me?"

        -   "What are the loudest or most obvious goals right now, and
            what are the quieter, underlying ones?"

        -   "What goals am I affected by---but might not be fully aware
            of---from others involved or from the broader context?"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Insight:** We often focus on the loudest
        or most conscious goals, but **conflicting or background goals
        may be shaping your reactions**---and others'. This step expands
        on Lazarus's primary appraisal of goal congruence
        [@lazarus1984stress].

-   **N -- Notice urgency**: Action-orientation + systems thinking. Asks
    what can be done constructively, not just what is felt. Encourages
    agency over rumination.

    -   *Ask yourself: What can I do about the expressed and
        non-received goals?*

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Appraisal dimension: Coping Potential**

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:**

        -   "Which goals feel most urgent or pressing for me and for
            others?"

        -   "What specific actions are possible right now to address
            these urgent goals, even small ones?"

        -   "What's outside of my immediate control or influence in this
            situation? How can I accept that?"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Insight:** Urgency often comes from
        feeling like we can't act on a critical goal. **Noticing what's
        doable helps restore emotional agency.** This reflects Lazarus's
        secondary appraisal of coping potential [@lazarus1984stress].

-   **D -- Discern Stakes (and Divine Compassion)**: Narrative humility,
    shared responsibility. Avoids blame, embraces complexity, promotes
    collective insight and equity thinking. Instead of assigning
    responsibility, **Discern Stakes** invites a humble inquiry into who
    is experiencing the highest emotional or physical vulnerability in
    this situation. From a spiritual appraisal perspective, this isn't
    about blame, but recognizing the deepest \"sacred concerns\" or
    \"spiritual goals\" at risk.

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Appraisal dimensions: Goal Significance
        & Existential Threat.**

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:**

        -   \"For whom are the **emotional stakes highest** right now?
            (e.g., fear of loss, profound grief, intense anxiety). What
            specific emotions indicate these high stakes?\"

        -   \"Who faces the **greatest physical vulnerability** or
            potential harm in this situation?\"

        -   \"What **core values or sense of purpose** feel most
            threatened for different individuals involved? (This links
            emotions to our relationship with the sacred or ultimate
            concerns, extending traditional appraisal theory).\"

        -   \"How can I approach this discernment with **deep compassion
            and humility** for all experiencing high stakes, even those
            whose actions I might disagree with?\"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Insight:** Emotions are signals that
        something deeply valuable, perhaps even sacred, is at stake. By
        humbly discerning these vulnerabilities across all involved, we
        cultivate empathy and open a path towards responses rooted in
        compassion rather than judgment, aligning with a spiritual
        understanding of interconnected suffering and well-being.


### **Applying the LENS: Layered Emotive Narratives of Stakes** {#applying-the-lens-layered-emotive-narratives-of-stakes .unnumbered}

**LENS** This framework emphasizes understanding a situation by viewing
it through different \"lenses.\" This component represents a unique
extension of Lazarus's appraisal theory, introducing relational and
temporal dimensions to emotional appraisal.

First, establish the timeframe of the situation: past, current, or
future.

Next, identify the protagonist as the individual or group with the most
to gain or save in the narrative. The deuteragonist or antagonist
(depending on whether they intend to help or harm the protagonist's
cause) is then identified as the party working towards or against the
protagonist's goal.

Each letter in this framework represents a pair of contrasting
appraisals---one from the protagonist's perspective and the other from
the antagonist's---at different points in time. These appraisals draw
upon Lazarus's concepts of primary and secondary appraisals, but are
uniquely framed within Gnomy's relational context.

-   **L - Loss (Past) vs. Legitimacy (Past)**

    -   **Protagonist (Your View):** Focus on the **Loss** (Harm/Loss)
        endured in the past. *Prompt: \"What specific harm or loss have
        I experienced or perceived in the past related to this
        situation?\"*

    -   **Antagonist (Their View):** Focus on the **Legitimacy** of
        their past actions or the perceived \"credit\" they deserve for
        outcomes you see as harmful. *Prompt: \"From their perspective,
        what past actions do they believe were justified or what credit
        do they feel they deserve for past outcomes, even if I see them
        as harmful?\"*

    -   *Paired Appraisals:* Harm/Loss (Primary) vs. Blame/Credit
        (Secondary, from their view).

-   **E - Effort (Present) vs. Entitlement (Present)**

    -   **Protagonist (Your View):** Focus on the **Effort** (Challenge)
        being exerted in the present to overcome difficulties. *Prompt:
        \"What challenges am I currently facing, and what effort am I
        putting in to overcome them?\"*

    -   **Antagonist (Their View):** Focus on their **Entitlement** or
        belief in their *current* rightness, or the perception that your
        challenge is due to their justified actions. *Prompt: \"From
        their perspective, what are they doing now that they believe is
        justified, and why might they feel entitled to their current
        position or actions?\"*

    -   *Paired Appraisals:* Challenge (Primary) vs. Coping Potential
        (Secondary, their perceived control/justification).

-   **N - Nuisance (Future) vs. Necessity (Future)**

    -   **Protagonist (Your View):** Views their actions/existence as a
        **Nuisance** (Threat) for the future. *Prompt: \"How do I
        perceive their potential future actions or presence as a threat
        or nuisance to my goals or well-being?\"*

    -   **Antagonist (Their View):** Views their future actions as a
        **Necessity** for their goals, even if it threatens yours.
        *Prompt: \"From their perspective, what future actions do they
        see as absolutely necessary for their own goals, even if it
        impacts me negatively?\"*

    -   *Paired Appraisals:* Threat (Primary) vs. Future Expectations
        (Secondary, their predicted justified outcomes).

-   **S - Safety (Your Goal) vs. Supremacy (Their Goal)**

    -   **Protagonist (Your View):** Primarily seeking **Safety** and
        well-being. *Prompt: \"What is my ultimate goal in this
        situation -- what does safety or well-being look like for me?\"*

    -   **Antagonist (Their View):** Primarily seeking **Supremacy** or
        dominance in the situation. *Prompt: \"What does their ultimate
        goal appear to be -- is it about control, winning, or asserting
        dominance?\"*

    -   *General Goal Contrast: This is more of an overarching
        contextual goal than a specific appraisal, but it helps frame
        the differing drivers.*


## Step 1: Narrative of Emotion and Meaning

### 1.1 Narrative (LUX) -- Explore Your Emotions and Their Roots

Emotions are signals, not noise. They reflect unmet needs, broken
expectations, or meaningful desires. The **LUX Lantern model** helps you
dive into your emotional narrative, illuminating your inner landscape
through three key axes. This model uniquely integrates neurochemical
correlates with the Kano model's feature categories to understand
emotional responses.



-   **L -- Longing (Dopamine $\times$ Kano's Attractive Features)**:
    What desires, hopes, or unspoken rewards are present? What do you
    secretly long for in this situation? This speaks to your intrinsic
    motivations and the "delighters" you seek. (Proposed link: Dopamine
    is associated with reward-seeking and motivation, aligning with the
    pursuit of attractive features).

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:** \"What specific desires, hopes,
        or unspoken rewards am I feeling or seeking in this situation?\"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:** \"What 'attractive features'
        (things that would truly delight me if present) are missing or
        present, and what emotions do they evoke?\"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Insight:** Identifying longing helps
        uncover core motivations and potential sources of joy or
        disappointment.

-   **U -- Usefulness (Serotonin $\times$ Kano's Performance
    Features)**: How does this situation impact your sense of
    reliability, control, well-being, or self-worth? What aspects feel
    reliable or are providing a sense of competence? This focuses on the
    functional value and performance aspects that contribute to your
    satisfaction. (Proposed link: Serotonin is linked to feelings of
    well-being, stability, and competence, aligning with performance
    features).

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:** \"How does this situation affect
        my sense of control, competence, or overall well-being?\"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:** \"What 'performance features'
        (things that are expected to function well) are working or not
        working, and how does that make me feel?\"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Insight:** Understanding usefulness
        reveals how the situation impacts your sense of security and
        efficacy.

-   **X -- X-Friction (Noradrenaline $\times$ Kano's Must-Be/Reverse
    Features)**: What threats, irritations, pressures, or unmet basic
    needs are you experiencing? What feels like an unavoidable obstacle
    or something that, if absent, would cause significant
    dissatisfaction? This addresses the "must-be" qualities and sources
    of negative affect. (Proposed link: Noradrenaline is associated with
    stress response and vigilance, aligning with the impact of absent
    'must-be' features).

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:** \"What specific threats,
        irritations, or pressures am I experiencing right now?\"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Ask:** \"What 'must-be features' (basic
        expectations that cause dissatisfaction if absent) are not being
        met, and how do they manifest emotionally (e.g., frustration,
        anxiety)?\"

    -   **$\blacktriangleright$ Insight:** Identifying X-friction helps
        pinpoint sources of distress and unmet fundamental needs.

### 1.2 Others (CROWS) -- Who Else Is Part of This Emotional Story?

We are shaped by relationships---past, present, and imagined. A crow
will fly to other gnomes, inviting them to transfer their insights to
your understanding. Ask **CROWS** to place your experience in a broader
social context, fostering mentalization and perspective-taking.



-   **C -- Current others**: Who else is involved now? How do their
    perspectives or emotions interact with yours? *Prompt: \"Who are the
    key people currently involved in this situation? What might they be
    thinking, feeling, or needing right now?\"*

-   **R -- Retrospective self**: How would your past self interpret or
    feel about this? What lessons from past experiences are relevant
    now? *Prompt: \"If my past self (e.g., 5 years ago, or during a
    similar challenge) looked at this situation, what would they think
    or feel? What lessons did I learn then that apply now?\"*

-   **O -- Optional future self**: What emotional legacy are you
    creating? What might your future self think or feel? *Prompt:
    \"Imagine your future self, perhaps a year from now, looking back at
    this moment. What emotional legacy do you want to have created? What
    advice would your wise future self give you?\"*

-   **W -- Wished-for others**: Are there people you hope to connect
    with or impress? Fantasies, role models, or longings? *Prompt: \"Are
    there people (real or imagined, like role models or mentors) whose
    opinions or approval I value in this context? What kind of
    connection or impact do I wish to have with them?\"*

-   **S -- Shared past**: What shared experiences or histories are
    influencing this moment? *Prompt: \"What shared experiences,
    histories, or agreements (or disagreements) are influencing this
    moment for all involved? How does our collective history shape
    current dynamics and emotions?\"*

## Step 2: Reframe Through Shared Competence and Action

### 2.1 More (SPARK) -- Uncover Resources, Strengths, and Options

Imagine the gnome's current situation as a plant in a pond. To move to
another \"situation\" (represented by a different plant), the gnome
needs a leaf boat---an old, dried leaf from their personal leaf heap.
The gnome steers a floating spark in the air by twisting and gesturing
with their left hand. This spark, when moved circularly, heats the
surrounding air, creating a gentle wind. With this wind, the gnome
directs a dried leaf from their heap to the water's edge of their
current plant. Stepping onto this leaf, the gnome then uses it as a
cable ferry, pulling along a tendril stretched between the plants to
cross to the next. This leaf boat is the asset that enables the gnome to
navigate from one situation to another. This stage leverages principles
from solution-focused brief therapy and positive psychology.



From this awareness, you can move towards possibility. Expand your
narrative understanding through the wisdom of other \"gnomes\" (people
or external knowledge) or your own inner resources. Use SPARK to
inventory the personal and interpersonal resources available to you:

-   **S -- Strengths**: What abilities, traits, or skills do you bring
    to this moment? *Prompt: \"What are my core strengths, talents, or
    positive qualities that can help me navigate this situation? (e.g.,
    resilience, creativity, empathy, analytical thinking)\"*

-   **P -- Possibilities**: What courses of action exist? Be
    creative---don't filter options yet. *Prompt: \"Brainstorm at least
    3-5 different courses of action, even if they seem unconventional or
    difficult. What are all the potential ways forward?\"*

-   **A -- Assets**: What tangible and intangible resources (e.g.,
    tools, time, information, shared community resources) can you rely
    on? *Prompt: \"What tangible assets (e.g., time, money, specific
    tools, information) or intangible assets (e.g., reputation, trust,
    past successes) do I have access to?\"*

-   **R -- Resourced Relationships**: Who can walk with you in this? Who
    offers strength, support, challenge, or insight? *Prompt: \"Who are
    the people in my network (friends, family, colleagues, mentors) who
    can offer support, advice, or a different perspective? Who can I
    reach out to?\"*

-   **K -- Knowledge & Experience**: What lessons have you already
    learned? What frameworks or facts do you already hold? *Prompt:
    \"What relevant knowledge or past experiences do I possess that
    could inform my approach? What frameworks or facts do I already hold
    that are relevant to this challenge?\"*

### 2.2 Yikes! (SAGE) -- Face Risks, Limits, and Priorities

On the tendril there are sage leaves growing, symbolizing the wisdom and
often bitter truths involved in facing risks. Before committing to
action, reflect on risk, responsibility, and refinement. Use **SAGE** to
evaluate outcomes and adapt. This stage integrates strategic foresight,
stress inoculation training, and ACT principles.



-   **S -- Spectrum**: Define three kinds of outcomes:

    -   **Scary**: What's the worst-case scenario? What would feel like
        a failure? *Prompt: \"If I take action, what is the absolute
        worst outcome I can imagine? What would be the biggest failure
        or loss?\"*

    -   **Sufficient**: What's "good enough" to move forward? *Prompt:
        \"What would be a 'good enough' outcome? What's the minimum
        acceptable result that would allow me to move forward?\"*

    -   **Successful**: What would a meaningful win look like? *Prompt:
        \"What would a truly meaningful win or ideal outcome look like
        for me in this situation?\"*

-   **A -- Actions**: For each outcome, what are possible reactions or
    strategies?

    -   **Avoidance**: What might I try to escape or delay? *Prompt:
        \"What tendencies do I have to avoid or delay action in this
        situation, and what are the consequences of that avoidance?\"*

    -   **Anchoring**: What stable actions keep me grounded under
        stress? *Prompt: \"What stable, consistent actions can I take to
        stay grounded and resilient, even if the situation becomes
        stressful?\"*

    -   **Aspiration**: What bold or creative steps move me toward
        success? *Prompt: \"What bold, creative, or values-aligned steps
        can I take to move towards my 'Successful' outcome?\"*

-   **G -- Gauge**: Assess urgency and importance. *Prompt: \"Based on
    my desired outcomes and potential actions, which actions are most
    urgent and most important right now? What's the immediate next
    step?\"*

-   **E -- Evolution**: The world changes---and so do you. This step
    mirrors the OODA loop for continuous adaptation.

    -   **Examine**: What feedback are you receiving? *Prompt: \"What
        new information, reactions, or feedback am I observing from my
        actions or the environment?\"*

    -   **Evaluate**: What's working, what's not? *Prompt: \"Based on
        this feedback, what aspects of my plan or actions are working
        well, and what is not working as expected?\"*

    -   **Edit**: What needs adjusting or dropping? *Prompt: \"What
        specific adjustments do I need to make to my approach, or what
        elements should I drop entirely?\"*

    -   **Expand**: Connect to the pain-points. Reflect on what changed
        through your Gnomy process. What pain points were resolved? What
        challenges remain or new tensions arose? Who benefited, who was
        affected, and what became clearer? Share this with those
        impacted by the results. This step isn't just closure---it's a
        bridge to the next cycle, grounding future action in real
        insight and shared learning. *Prompt: \"Reflect on the entire
        Gnomy process: What pain points were resolved or eased? What new
        insights did I gain? What challenges or tensions remain, or have
        new ones arisen? Who benefited from my actions, and who was
        affected? What became clearer for me and for others? How will I
        share these insights with those impacted?\"*

## Feedback Loop

If your plan feels shaky, your emotions shift, or new obstacles appear,
it's like the gnome realizing their current plant isn't stable or the
path forward is unclear. In such moments, the gnome doesn't despair;
instead, they might return to **Step 0 (Grounding)** to steady their
footing on their current plant, or revisit **Step 1 (Narrative)** to
re-evaluate the story of where they are and where they want to go. The
Gnomy Framework, much like the interconnected plants in the pond, is
cyclical and flexible---designed for ongoing clarity, growth, and
recalibration as you navigate from one \"situation-plant\" to the next.


## What Gnomy Should Be Used For

## Coaching & Mentorship

To help clients:

-   Gain clarity in emotionally charged or complex situations.

-   Shift from rumination to structured insight.

-   Reframe failures, risks, or uncertainties into growth paths.

-   Clarify responsibilities and action options in relational contexts.

## Self-Reflection & Emotional Navigation

For individuals to:

-   Understand how personal stories and social influences shape
    decisions.

-   Ground themselves during stress or at key decision points.

-   Identify emotional needs, risks, and motivations.

-   Develop resilience through narrative self-work and emotional agency.

## Team & Group Dynamics

For use in teams to:

-   Reflect on past collaboration patterns and improve communication.

-   Clarify individual and shared goals, risks, and unspoken
    assumptions.

-   Create psychological safety by mapping different emotional truths.

-   Balance personal contributions with team-wide needs.

## Leadership & Strategy Design

To support leaders in:

-   Balancing rational planning with underlying emotional currents.

-   Anticipating team member perspectives and motivations.

-   Making decisions aligned with both vision (aspiration) and risk
    awareness.

-   Creating roadmaps that account for psychological barriers and
    enablers.


## What Gnomy Could Be Used For (Extensions and Creative Use)

## Mental Health & Therapeutic Dialogue

-   Integrate into DBT, ACT, or narrative therapy contexts.

-   Use it to externalize inner conflict and conflicting desires.

-   Normalize self-doubt or avoidance as part of the SAGE map.

## Conflict Mediation or Repair

-   Use with dyads or teams to unpack both perspectives in grounded,
    safe terms.

-   Apply CROWS to map others' contributions to the situation (past,
    hopes, expectations).

-   Apply **FIND the LENS** to reduce misinterpretations or emotional
    reactivity.

## Workshop & Curriculum Design

-   Design personal development workshops or group training around each
    Gnomy stage.

-   Use it to teach leadership, communication, or emotional intelligence
    in schools or organizations.

-   Create journaling prompts, guided meditations, or team debrief
    templates using each step.


## Why the Gnomy Framework Should Work: Theoretical Foundations

The Gnomy Framework explicitly grounds its components in a range of
established psychological and strategic theories, asserting that these
foundations contribute to its efficacy. This theoretical alignment is a
significant aspect of its design and potential impact. Where Gnomy
extends or uniquely synthesizes these theories, it is explicitly noted.

## Mindfulness & Grounding (FIND the LENS)

DBT Mindfulness [@linehan1993cognitive] & MBSR [@kabat1990full] provide
strong evidence that grounding techniques like breathing and pausing
improve emotional regulation, reduce anxiety, and enhance cognitive
clarity. Gnomy's **FIND the LENS** sequence---integrating embodied
awareness, goal mapping, and the nuanced discernment of stakes---mirrors
widely used and validated techniques such as STOP and body scans in DBT,
while adding a critical layer of multi-perspective emotional appraisal.
The inclusion of 'Discern Stakes (and Divine Compassion)' in FIND, which
introduces a \"spiritual appraisal perspective\" and \"humble inquiry
into who is experiencing the highest emotional or physical
vulnerability,\" represents a conceptual extension beyond traditional
Lazarusian appraisal theory [@lazarus1984stress]. While potentially
broadening the framework's scope to existential concerns, this unique
addition aims to cultivate empathy and align with an understanding of
interconnected well-being.

## Narrative & Externalization (LUX + CROWS)

Psychological research and therapeutic models such as Narrative Therapy
[@white1990narrative], Internal Family Systems (IFS)
[@schwartz1995internal], and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)
[@beck1979cognitive] support the idea that naming emotions and
constructing coherent narratives helps reduce distress and increase
meaning. The **LUX** step aligns with these methods by encouraging
emotional labeling, meaning-making, and introspective clarity through
the lens of longing, usefulness, and friction. Its integration of
neurochemistry (Dopamine, Serotonin, Noradrenaline) with the Kano
model's Attractive, Performance, and Must-Be features
[@kano1984attractive] is a highly innovative, cross-disciplinary
approach, suggesting a physiological basis for emotional responses tied
to perceived \"features\" of a situation. The **CROWS** stage brings in
elements of mentalization [@fonagy2002affect], perspective-taking, and
attachment theory [@bowlby1969attachment]---all essential for emotional
intelligence and relationship repair. Reflecting on the role of others
(real, imagined, past, future) creates space for compassion,
re-interpretation, and systemic insight.

## Resource-Oriented Thinking (SPARK)

**SPARK** mirrors concepts from solution-focused brief therapy
[@de1997building], positive psychology [@seligman2011flourish], and
resilience theory [@masten2001ordinary]. Shifting attention toward
resources, relationships, and internal strengths has been shown to
increase optimism, motivation, and problem-solving capacity. It also
encourages autonomy and competence---two key components of
self-determination theory [@ryan2000self].

## Risk Mapping & Action Planning (SAGE)

The **SAGE** component integrates strategic foresight/scenario planning
[@schoemaker1995scenario], stress inoculation training
[@meichenbaum1985stress], and values-based decision-making. By
identifying outcome spectrums (Scary--Sufficient--Successful) and
categorizing strategies (Avoid--Anchor--Aspire), users are better
equipped to evaluate trade-offs, mitigate anxiety, and act
intentionally. It also reflects ACT (Acceptance and Commitment Therapy)
principles by balancing risk acceptance with committed action
[@hayes1999acceptance], and the OODA loop (Observe--Orient--Decide--Act)
from military and strategic planning [@boyd1986destruction]---creating a
feedback loop that favors adaptive iteration over rigid execution.

## Iterative and Cyclical Design

Unlike rigid frameworks, Gnomy is built for real-life messiness. Its
looping structure (returning to Grounding, Narrative, or Others when
stuck) aligns with how humans process uncertainty and change. This makes
it ideal for personal development, emotional healing, or strategic
leadership in unpredictable environments [@kolb1984experiential].


## Suggested Use Cases by Profession

  **Role**               **Example Use**
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Coach**              Guide a client through a business pivot using **LUX** to understand underlying emotional drives and then SPARK $\rightarrow$ SAGE to reframe fears and strategize action.
  **Therapist**          Use CROWS to help a client understand how childhood dynamics shape current interpersonal reactions, and then **LUX** to explore the emotional longing, usefulness, and friction present in their current relationships.
  **Team Facilitator**   Run a post-project debrief using **FIND the LENS** and **LUX** to explore what worked emotionally and interpersonally, specifically addressing the team's shared longing, perceptions of usefulness, and points of friction, and understanding the different perspectives of stakeholders.
  **Startup Founder**    Use SPARK to inventory team strengths and brainstorm pivot paths, followed by SAGE to stress-test risk scenarios, informed by insights from **LUX** regarding the team's intrinsic motivations (longing) and potential pain points (friction), and using **FIND the LENS** to anticipate stakeholder reactions.
  **Educator**           Integrate the Gnomy framework into leadership or emotional intelligence curricula to foster reflective decision-making, encouraging students to use **LUX** to analyze the emotional components of complex problems and **FIND the LENS** to develop empathy for diverse viewpoints.
  **Mediator**           Apply CROWS and SAGE with conflicting parties to find shared history, individual concerns, and acceptable compromises, enhanced by using **LUX** to understand the underlying emotional drivers (longing, usefulness, friction) contributing to each party's perspective, and employing **FIND the LENS** to clarify the different appraisal of stakes from each side.


## Summary: Why the World Needs Gnomy

In an era of burnout, isolation, polarization, and rapid change, the
Gnomy Framework gives people a structured, imaginative way to reconnect
with their inner compass and with each other. It invites emotional
honesty and strategic thinking into the same space---bridging feeling
and action, pain and power, isolation and connection. It empowers people
not just to cope, but to cultivate meaning, collaborate wisely, and lead
with heart.


# The bibliography
99 Linehan, M. M. (1993). *Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Borderline
Personality Disorder*. Guilford Press. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). *Full
Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of Your Body and Mind to Face
Stress, Pain, and Illness*. Delta. White, M., & Epston, D. (1990).
*Narrative Means to Therapeutic Ends*. W. W. Norton & Company. Schwartz,
R. C. (1995). *Internal Family Systems Therapy*. Guilford Press. Beck,
A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). *Cognitive Therapy
of Depression*. Guilford Press. Fonagy, P., Gergely, G., Jurist, E. L.,
& Target, M. (2002). *Affect Regulation, Mentalization, and the
Development of the Self*. Other Press. Bowlby, J. (1969). *Attachment
and Loss, Vol. 1: Attachment*. Attachment and Loss. de Shazer, S.
(1997). *Words Were Originally Magic*. W. W. Norton & Company. Seligman,
M. E. P. (2011). *Flourish: A Visionary New Understanding of Happiness
and Well-being*. Free Press. Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000).
Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation,
social development, and well-being. *American Psychologist*, 55(1),
68--78. Schoemaker, P. J. H. (1995). Scenario Planning: A Tool for
Strategic Thinking. *Sloan Management Review*, 36(2), 25--40.
Meichenbaum, D. (1985). *Stress Inoculation Training*. Pergamon Press.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). *Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy: An Experiential Approach to Behavior Change*.
Guilford Press. Boyd, J. R. (1986). *Destruction and Creation*. U.S.
Army Command and General Staff College. Kolb, D. A. (1984).
*Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and
Development*. Prentice-Hall. Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984).
*Stress, Appraisal, and Coping*. Springer Publishing Company. Kano, N.,
Seraku, N., Takahashi, F., & Tsuji, S. (1984). Attractive quality and
must-be quality. *Journal of the Japanese Society for Quality Control*,
14(2), 39-48. Masten, A. S. (2001). Ordinary magic: Resilience in
development. *American Psychologist*, 56(3), 227--238.

